---
layout: post
title: Machine Learning in Security
subtitle: Chasing the unseen threat with analytics
tags: AI, Data Analytics, Machine Learning, Security AI
comments: true
---

Insider threat has always been a unique and often extremely difficult problem to tackle in the business world. Often, employees are only gauged for their potential threat if there is a risk of the employee becoming disgruntled or let go. Unfortunately, this is often too little too late. Often, in post mortem analysis, we find several events which could be considered “red flags” in the employee or user behavior. This is often viewed as a “hindsight is 20/20” mentality. This no longer must be the case.  

By leveraging datapoints generated by employee behavior (both online and offline) we can “paint” a picture of our risk level. Several tools marketed to the infosec community advertise using user behavior analytics as a means for understanding your threat landscape. Although this is beneficial, it only shows one part of the possible evaluation. In many cases, the other aspects of user behavior are not accounted for. 

To illustrate this, we can look at the case involving Jizhong Chen. Jizhong was employed by Apple as an engineer working on the self-driving car program in the research and development sector. In January of 2019, Jizhong was reported to Apple security who subsequently worked with the FBI in the ensuing investigation. During the investigation, it was found that Jizhong had been stealing/photographing highly confidential and proprietary schematics on his phone and had backed up his company issued laptop to his personal device. In the end, Jizhong was found to be in possession of over 2000 different documents and was summarily charged with attempting to steal trade secrets. This trail of documents and images went as far back as June 2018. Which was weeks after Jizhong was hired as an electrical engineer. 

Events like this often bring about the question of how we detect these types of threats to the company. In the case of Apple and Jizhong, the measures in place to detect the breach were outmatched by something as simple as photographing the schematics on his own laptop. He had also been placed on a “Performance Improvement Plan” by Apple prior to being reported by other Apple employees. 

This event echoed a previous arrest involving Apple’s intellectual property in mid-2018.  Another individual by the name of Xiaolang Zhang also worked on the self-driving car program. He had been employed by Apple for almost 3 years prior to being arrested for stealing trade secrets. When Xiaolang was found to be applying for jobs in China and had suddenly resigned to “take care of his ailing mother”, Apple’s security team had him turn in his company issued phone and laptop in which they found he had Airdropped over 40 GB of sensitive data to his wife’s personal device. (O'Kane, 2019) 

The two events above could have been extremely detrimental in terms of both financial and reputational damage. This leads to the question often posed in many post mortem investigations, how do we detect these events when they are able to circumvent common detection methods? Some companies have resorted to preventing employees from taking company devices out of the office. This simply reduces the ability for the employee to be productive outside of the office. Some have resorted to strict inability to access resources unless you are actively monitored. This creates a barrier for many employees who often see security as a barrier to productivity vs a safety net.   

This brings about the question of how to best approach this problem. In my opinion, instead of raising higher obvious forms of detection, increase the sensitivity of what is being measured and evaluate your threats in real time. This is where we leverage our analytics to evaluate the risk. 

In the cases above, we see a variety of red flags which in the post event review, indicated there were problems. So, it begs the question, why did we not notice them before? One barrier that jumps out is that of the data points being so siloed that we don’t effectively leverage them. In the case of Jizhong, we noted that the individual had been placed on a “Performance Improvement Plan” (PIP) prior to being reported for the photos but had not been investigated. Now this isn’t to say that every single employee who has a PIP is a potential insider threat. It simply is a part of the model which should be considered.  

In the case of Xiaolang, we see that his actions were a bit more verbose in terms of drawing attention. By openly applying for jobs in China (specifically to work for a Chinese EV start up) and the sudden resignation, we see that he immediately became a high risk for intellectual property concerns. This mixed with data logs of his device, could have been an indication of a potential need for review.  

Although disparate in nature, all the points above indicated there was some sort of cause for concern. Wither it be the sudden departure or the employee openly applying for jobs on the company system, these are all known indications that there may be some associated risk.  

So, what are the datapoints that are being referenced. Those data points that could be incorporated into the model are users web traffic. Specific points such as if they individual is spending an absorbent amount of time on Job forums or if they have been noted for uploading documents to application. Many information security programs already have Data Loss Prevention (DLP) enabled which would flag individuals uploading things like company documents and resumes to job boards.  

This can be done in a two-phase approach. If a DLP event is triggered, this event can be reviewed by a Security Operations Center which can declare the event true or false. In the data fields, this would be considered a 1 for positive and 0 for negative. This allows the event to be reviewed even before the individual enters the model.  

The next portion of the model would rest on the physical security side. In many organizations, the badge records show where an individual has badged as well as how often they were accepted or rejected. By setting a threshold just above the average number of rejections, the system can algorithmically flag individuals who are repetitively being rejected at a door. By weighting the door in the selection by if it is a high value door, we can indicate risk. This would also be checked by the Security Operations Center. The idea behind this is to allow the SOC to mitigate the issue in real time and reduce the number of false positives for those individuals who may be confused by the door or have a badge related issue.  

The third part of the equation is the human resources side of the evaluation. Human Resources is a new variable when evaluating insider threat. In the cases above, the individual who was found as a threat was previously placed on what is considered a Performance Improvement Plan. These plans are often utilized by the individual’s manager and HR to document a coaching session in which the individual must meet certain criteria prior to a date or face further actions. This is typically a rather large red flag that an individual may no longer feel they have anything to lose and may act. This would be introduced into the data as a single flag of TRUE or FALSE which would be considered.  

This data point would be the most difficult to capture due to the sensitive nature of Human Resources related information. Although, it would be immensely valuable when evaluating if someone has reached the point in which they need a closer watch. 

Now that the data has been collected and crafted into a usable file, the next step would be to move on to a machine learning algorithm to process the data. It has been my experience that this would call for a classification type algorithm and would probably be useful to use a Decision Tree/Random Forest. This would be used to classify the individual into High or Low risk. Once the classification is made, the system can then export the report and distribute to those in the decision-making process to decide on next steps.  

The algorithm choice is closely related to the binary outcome that we would be looking for. Due to the constraints on many security departments, there is often not enough resources to manage all the challenges faced. By raising the investigation/monitoring threshold, we can eliminate the noise from the data and focus on those who meet the higher criteria.  

The process above describes the design and build of a data-based insider threat detection program. Although not comprehensive, the process above describes harnessing the data flows that are generated on an every day basis. Another benefit of utilizing this approach is that we can offload much of the initial detection workload and utilize our dynamic human capital to perform the investigations.  

This would increase the effectiveness of the process dynamically. As with any model, this would not be an absolute solution. The process would flow as stated above but when a positive threat or interest is identified, then the process moves offline and into the queue for a human investigator to evaluate and see if they agree with the model selection. If the team member agrees, then the investigation continues forward. If the team member disagrees, then the flag is disregarded. 

 

Bibliography 

O'Kane, S. (2019, January 30). A second Apple employee was charged with stealing self-driving car project secrets. 

 

 

 

 
